[TOC]

### [Also Known As]
<!-- All other names the pattern is known by.-->
P3P

## Context
<!-- The situations in which the pattern may apply.-->
<!-- Aspects which constrain the solution, but are not modified by it. They affect the impact of different forces.-->

Users are frequently intimidated or discouraged by the size and complexity of legal texts. Privacy policies are an example of such texts, which are in the user's best interest to understand. As these policies are also written for the sake of legal compliance, balancing or reconciling comprehensiveness with comprehensibility is nontrivial. Different users will have varying thresholds to the amount of detail they will readily look through. The controller in this case wants to make their privacy policy more accessible to their users.

## Problem
<!-- The problem a pattern addresses, including a list of forces describing why a problem might be difficult to solve.-->
<!-- Should be context-free, leading with a concise problem statement.-->

Users regularly do not read privacy policies, as they are too verbose, complex, and repetitive amongst the sites they visit.

#### Forces and Concerns
<!-- Implications in this problem which affect the appropriateness of a solution, and are affected by this pattern.-->
<!-- Forces should be highly visible for easy reference, where less obvious a dedicated section is recommended.-->

- Users typically do not want to read walls of texts, often needing to be persuaded to inform themselves
- Controllers want to ensure that users are not surprised and or upset about what is done with their data
- A number of users want to really understand what risks they are taking regarding their privacy
- Controllers want to be legally compliant, and minimize the costs involved in catering to data protection

<!--#### Indications-->
<!-- Symptoms that may indicate the existence of this problem, if otherwise unclear.-->

## Solution
<!-- A concise description of how the pattern addresses the problem.-->

Controllers may use the P3P standardization of terms and data elements to construct their privacy policies, allowing users to instead immediately see the policy distinctions which matter before using the service. The policies they share with other controllers the user is subject to will already have been reviewed, or are separated such that minimal time is spent reviewing policy.

#### Rationale
<!-- Where useful or otherwise unclear, justification for the solution's appropriateness in this pattern's context.-->
By removing redundancies, there is far less to read. By standardizing, comprehension is strengthened.

### [Structure]
<!--A detailed specification of the structural aspects of the pattern. A class diagram if applicable.-->

P3P uses eXtensible Markup Language (XML) to hold a variety of information concerning each web resource listed in a policy reference file. The XML includes the data elements or types collected, its recipients, and explanations of how each set of data is used (purposes and means). It also features important information about the controller and its general policies and practices, such as contact information, a link to the human readable policy, and dispute resolution. It does not contain information about what the controller does not do.

### [Implementation]
<!--Guidelines for implementing the pattern; code fragments; suggested PETS; policy fragments.-->

The controller must publish the P3P syntax files and policy reference file to their live site. The files may be generated by automated tools. It is encouraged that the policy reference file be published in the [well-known location](https://www.w3.org/TR/P3P/#Well_Known_Location), `/w3c/p3p.xml`. A `link` tag or [HTTP Headers](https://www.w3.org/TR/P3P/#syntax_ext) may also be used. The policies used may also cover the entire site, or specific areas.

Further information is available at https://www.w3.org/TR/P3P/

## Consequences
<!--The advantages (benefits) and disadvantages (liabilities) of applying the pattern.-->

Users will be able to construct preferences for a privacy standard (risk appetite) which they personally can accept. This template will allow them to quickly review the privacy policy of the controller while avoiding repetition, and understanding distinctions. They may additionally choose to have site-specific preferences which point out what is most relevant to them.

### [Constraints]
<!-- limitations as a consequence of applying the pattern.-->

The human readable privacy policy should be compatible with what can also be expressed using the P3P standardization. While extensions can be made to the specification, there is a limit to this. Careful consideration will need to be used when constructing the policy to ensure full coverage. This may require additional explanation beyond what the P3P specification can provide, which needs to be clearly indicated and explained to users.

## Examples
<!--Motivational example to see how the pattern is applied.-->

The following example is taken from the P3P1.0 specification:

_Claudia has decided to check out a store called CatalogExample, located at http://www.catalog.example.com/. Let us assume that CatalogExample has placed P3P policies on all their pages, and that Claudia is using a Web browser with P3P built in._

_Claudia types the address for CatalogExample into her Web browser. Her browser is able to automatically fetch the P3P policy for that page. The policy states that the only data the site collects on its home page is the data found in standard HTTP access logs. Now Claudia's Web browser checks this policy against the preferences Claudia has given it. Is this policy acceptable to her, or should she be notified? Let's assume that Claudia has told her browser that this is acceptable. In this case, the homepage is displayed normally, with no pop-up messages appearing. Perhaps her browser displays a small icon somewhere along the edge of its window to tell her that a privacy policy was given by the site, and that it matched her preferences._

_Next, Claudia clicks on a link to the site's online catalog. The catalog section of the site has some more complex software behind it. This software uses cookies to implement a "shopping cart" feature. Since more information is being gathered in this section of the Web site, the Web server provides a separate P3P policy to cover this section of the site. Again, let's assume that this policy matches Claudia's preferences, so she gets no pop-up messages. Claudia continues and selects a few items she wishes to purchase. Then she proceeds to the checkout page._

_The checkout page of CatalogExample requires some additional information: Claudia's name, address, credit card number, and telephone number. Another P3P policy is available that describes the data that is collected here and states that her data will be used only for completing the current transaction, her order._

_Claudia's browser examines this P3P policy. Imagine that Claudia has told her browser that she wants to be warned whenever a site asks for her telephone number. In this case, the browser will pop up a message saying that this Web site is asking for her telephone number, and explaining the contents of the P3P statement. Claudia can then decide if this is acceptable to her. If it is acceptable, she can continue with her order; otherwise she can cancel the transaction._

_Alternatively, Claudia could have told her browser that she wanted to be warned only if a site is asking for her telephone number and was going to give it to third parties and/or use it for uses other than completing the current transaction. In that case, she would have received no prompts from her browser at all, and she could proceed with completing her order._

<!--### [Known Uses]-->
<!-- Pointers to various applications of the pattern.-->



## See Also
<!-- Any pointers to relevant information, not contained in the subfields below.-->



### [Related Patterns]
<!-- Supporting and conflicting patterns-->

This pattern _complements_ [Dynamic Privacy Policy Display](Dynamic-Privacy-Policy-Display). The solutions are different, but are within the same context. These patterns may work together to show the user the privacy policy and how it compares to the user preferences. [Dynamic Privacy Policy Display](Dynamic-Privacy-Policy-Display) _uses_ [Privacy Policy Display](Privacy-Policy-Display). This pattern also implicitly _complements_ that pattern.

This pattern _uses_ [Policy Matching Display](Policy-matching-display) and [Privacy-Aware Network Client](Privacy-aware-network-client). For both of these, context and problem are overlapping and the latter is a part of the solution's implementation described in the former. [Policy Matching Display](Policy-matching-display) in particular adds very useful improvements while including this pattern.

### [Sources]
<!-- References to the original source of the pattern.-->

L. Cranor, M. Langheinrich, M. Marchiori, and J. Reagle, “The Platform for Privacy Preferences 1.0 (P3P1.0) Specification,” W3C, 2002. [Online]. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/P3P/. [Accessed: 10-Oct-2017].

O. Drozd, “privacypatterns.wu.ac.at - Privacy Patterns Catalog,” privacypatterns.wu.ac.at, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://privacypatterns.wu.ac.at:8080/catalog/. [Accessed: 25-Jan-2017].

<!--## General Comments-->
<!-- Separate discussion on the pattern.-->



<!--## Tags-->
<!-- User definable descriptors for additional correlation.-->